---
layout: post
title:  "The Armies of Mistvale"
date:   2020-06-19 14:45:00 +0100
categories: fiction fantasy mistvale armies
---

Like most of the nations of Vanaheim, Mistvale has no true standing army, but due to the hostile nature of the landscape, the ever present threat of the sea princes, and the occasional internal conflict, it has a more cleanly developed infrastructure to mobilize one when needed.

The only meaningfully offensive forces in Mistvale are the Ranger companies - groups of fifty or so soldiers assigned to a region who are responsible for ensuring that it is safe to travel through, and protecting the roads and towns from predators, human and otherwise. These soldiers tend to be spread thin, but are trained, motivate and equipped for rapid deployment even away from the main roads. The exact composition of each ranger company varies wildly, but the average ranger can be expected to be a competent archer or crossbowman, decent rider, and solid swordsman, and have the training and leadership to apply those skills to great effect. These soldiers are equipped by the great lords of Mistvale, and their gear is generally of a high quality, well suited to the role of each individual ranger.

Rangers are not deployed en masse, and their role in larger military operations is as scouts, skirmishers and raiders, rather than as line troops.

The standing defensive force for each town in Mistvale is the town watch - these soldiers are traditionally paid for by the baron of the town, usually out of funds raised by taxes on the citizenry. They are usually relegated to basic law enforcement, but provide the first line of defence against any kind of attack. Watchmen are generally not numerous, but are fairly well armed - the average watchman wears a mix of cuir bouilli or mail armour, with a smaller round shield, decorated with the livery of the town, and a short sword. The main armament of a town guardsman varies regionally, but usually takes the form of some kind of polearm - towns in the south favour thrusting spears, towns in the north tend to favour varies kinds of poleaxe, and towns in areas plagued by the strigoi near-universally equip their guardsmen with partizans, which are held to be one of the more effective weapons against such foes. Guardsmen often carry crossbows, but are seldom reliable as ranged combatants.

Mustering a body of troops on a larger scale draws heavily on the feudal underpinnings of Mistvale society. When a great lord decides to go to war he summons his bannermen - the various lesser lords which owe him loyalty. These lords each bring their own vassels to the field and so on, down to the lowest levels. This retinue of retinues makes up the bulk of heavy infantry in the armies of Mistvale, and is the armoured core of most armies in the field.

Mistvale lacks a strong tradition of mounted nobility, with most knights fighting on foot. The effectiveness of heavy cavalry is certainly recognised - the mounted lancers of the Ravenguard being the most famous example - but the scarcity of suitable terrain and high cohesion of the largely spear-armed common infantry means that they are generally denied the prestige they acquire in some societies.

In normal campaigns, the most numerous part of the army is the levy - these are non-noble soldiers, recruited from the general population. The underlying social understanding is that all citizens hold an obligation for miltary service (subject to certain qualifications) known as the general levy. While the general levy might be called to service in a dire emergency, in most situations it is neither practical nor desirable to call to arms every adult of fighting age. When the levy troops are raised, this is usually done via the select levy system - each manor (the unit of land) is expected to provide a small number of soldiers and their armaments. These are generally young adults in good physical condition, and are armed to a much better standard than the general levy could be, making them quite effective combatants. The candidates for the select levy are usually decided in a manor well in advance, permitting them to be trained to use their equipment well - it's quite common for the select levy candidates to overlap with the town watch, for obvious reasons.

Select levy troops are conventionally armed with a spear, shield, helmet, sword and at least some armour, with the expectation that they fight in the shieldwall. The general levy is less well armed - the aspiration is to be equipped to the same standard, the shieldwall being a prestigious position in the battlefield, but good armour is expensive and high maintenance. Most general levy soldiers instead carry large reinforced wicker shields called _corac_ (the oldest examples of these resemble small coracles, hence the name) and usually an assortment of axes and daggers.