---
layout: post
title:  "Reposting Reddit 4: The Culture -- Part II (The Involved)"
date:   2023-06-14 23:00:00 +0100
categories: nonfiction update reddit theCulture
---

The Involved is the term used for those civilisations which are, as the name implies, involved in galactic civilisation. Not all civilisations in the series are Involved. By definition, any civilisation without faster-than-light space travel isn't Involved, although they might be Aspirant, if they are heading that way. Involved isn't purely a technological grouping, a civilisation might be Uninvoved by choice, by sequestering themselves in home territories and refusing contact with outsiders, but how well this works out if they have advanced neighbours who don't respect that decision is a matter of plot. There's a Level system used to rank the technology levels of civilisations by the Galactic Council in the time period of Matter, running from 1 to 8, but while the concept is a good one, the actual levels system seems to be legalistic, and it's more useful to understand civilisations in terms of Low- and High-Level Involved, and leave it at that.

At the top end of the tech tree are the High-Level Involved, civilisations who are pretty much as advanced as it's possible to be while still being in our universe. There's also Elder Civilisations, who are effectively comparably powerful civilisations that are self-isolated, and in many cases heading towards some variety of Sublimation, that being the term for the various kinds of ascension to other kinds of existence other than the physical. The details about Sublimation are sparse throughout the series, although being avowed ethical hedonists, the Culture is wary of the whole thing.

## What are the physically largest and smallest Involved races?

If we're talking about physical size:

The Flekke are implied to be jellyfish-like and roughly human-scale.

The Gzilt are reptilian and more or less human-sized.

The Homomdans are three-metre tall glistening-black pyramids (although the Homomdans aren't exactly Involved -- they're on the path to sublimation or elderhood).

Iridans are about two metres tall during their reproductive phase, but when they enter the warrior phase of their lifecycle they grow to three and a bit metres.

Morthanveld are essentially colour-changing pufferfish, about a metre in diameter.

The Nauptre Reliquaria are machines, and thus vary wildly -- some are as large as GSVs, others are nano-scale. The organic Nauptre are human-scale flying foxes.

If you want to throw in some of the slightly lower level but still arguably Involved:

The Affront are two-metre gasballs that explode in anything approaching sane atmospheric pressure, and are apparently powered by sadism.

Chelgarians are three-to-four metre-long tigers with too many legs.

Jhlupe are crabs about the size of a human rolled into a ball.

The Oct are crabs about the size of a child.

The best candidate for largest and smallest overall of the known Level 8 Involved are the Reliquaria, but they're cheating, being machines. Otherwise, the largest organics are warrior phase Iridans, followed by Homomdans, although you could make a case for Chelgarians. The smallest organics are probably the Oct, followed by the Jhlupe and the Morthanveld.

Although they're in no way Involved civilisations, for physically largest, you have the sentient clouds in Matter (unknown sizes, presumably normal cloud sized?), the Xinthian Tensile Aeranothaur (also from Matter, huge?), the Behemothaurs (massive?). Bulbitans are also massive, but they're machines, not organic, and if we want to talk about the largest sentient machines in the series, that's a whole different question.

## Why are the spacefaring civilisations, particularly the high-level Involved, all so similar?

Firstly, the high-level Involved are somewhat self-selecting group -- to count as such, you have to be capable of developing extremely advanced technology, surviving the societal consequences, and be gregarious enough to interact with other species, long after the point where you have any need to trade for anything.

Right off the bat, a lot of species never really get there. The Changers, for example, hang around for ages being part of the general galactic civilisation, but never have the numbers or motivation for more, and eventually go extinct. Others, like the Empire of Azad, develop reasonably advanced technology, but their social structures don't adapt, and eventually implode (the actual Azadians may well survive, especially with the Culture nudging them in the right direction, but the existence of the Dra'azon's Planets of the Dead shows that many comparable civilisations don't).

There are also plenty of civilisations that have highly advanced technology, but aren't Involved -- the Elder civilisations being one such grouping. Aeronathaurs clearly have some abilities that are probably technological in nature. And the Iln are scarily dangerous. Behemothaurs, solar baskers, and even sail-seeds all have similar issues, at their various technology levels. The defining feature here being, while they're clearly alive and intelligent, you can't really interact with them. And they don't want to interact with you.

Secondly, and relating to biology and technology, I think the relative similarity of the majority of technological species makes a fair amount of sense, and I think I can rationalise that (at least to my own satisfaction).

There are quite a few prerequisites to developing a technological society (based on our real world sample size of one species, and the Culture-verse Involved species). A species needs to be a tool-user, which means dexterity and fine motor control. They need have access to an environment that allows the kinds of chemical reactions that you need to support fairly high physical activity levels, and later, technology (which means fairly reactive substances in the atmosphere, such as oxygen or something similarly nasty). The species needs to be reasonably social -- at least parasocial -- otherwise they'll struggle to bootstrap their intelligence during their early evolution, and they won't develop enough of a culture to support things like research.

There are some general factors that would favour a reasonably similar body plan in an intelligent species that apply in pretty much every terrestrial environment. An upright posture offers a lot of advantages for a visually-orientated creature -- it significantly increases the distance at which you can spot predators and prey, (and being visually orientated is likely, it's easy to evolve, offers big advantages, and plays a big role in kickstarting brain evolution -- there's always an advantage in being better able to understand what you see). An upright posture is also useful because it increases the range of plant matter you can access (for herbivores and omnivores) and makes climbing easier (although it's not essential).

Bilateral symmetry in the real world is hard to assess. It's very possible that almost everything has bilateral symmetry simply because one of our very early ancestors at the worms-in-primordial-mud stage went with it, and we just stuck with it because it worked. The only animals on Earth than don't have more-or-less bilateral symmetry are echinoderms (starfish, sea urchins, that kind of thing) which have radial symmetry and none of those are terrestrial (or even freshwater -- they're all saltwater dwellers). The Culture-verse has aliens with trilateral symmetry (Homomdans are fully trilateral and Idirans fall somewhere between bi- and trilateral. Chelgarians are tripedal, but have bilateral symmetry) but the majority that we get described to us are bilateral.

If we accept that it's not just random chance, it's easy to justify why bilateral symmetry might be a common early adaptation in successful species. A clearly defined front and back makes it easy to concentrate motive power, and speed is obviously advantageous. Similarly, concentrating sensory organs in one direction allows innovations like stereopsis, which is a huge advantage for spotting camouflaged predators and prey, and makes the subsequent development of fine motor skills much easier (this could be done with other symmetries, but it would require stranger adaptations like eyestalks).

Once you're talking about an upright, bilaterally-symmetrical land-dweller, there are a couple of factors that will cause a trend towards bipedal locomotion. Every additional limb a creature has adds a cost, in terms of the extra energy required to maintain it, and the structural complexity required to operate it (in terms of extra joints, arteries, nervous system, etc).

For some invertebrates, specifically those that have a segmented body plan (think arthropods), that latter cost is much lower, because each segment is similar, so it only requires a few mutations to add another segment. Such segmented body plans don't lend themselves to supporting large brains, so we can probably ignore them.

For the rest, the limiting factor is how many limbs your modular ancestors had before they switched to a non-modular body plan. As a rule, it's a lot easier for to lose limbs than gain them. Existing limbs can atrophy and become vestigial, or even fuse to other bones entirely -- snakes being the classic example on Earth, and the Chelgrian midlimb in the Culture-verse.

There are some non-modular invertebrates that have more than four limbs -- crabs being the ones most relevant to us, given that we've got the Oct to think about. Crab limbs are interesting for a number of reasons, initially the sheer number -- true crabs are decapods, with eight of those limbs being used for locomotion, and two sporting chelae (claws). Most (although not all) crabs walk sideways, which is more efficient because it allows more space for each leg to traverse uninterrupted, and lets the crab lever against itself for more power. The narration reveals that the Oct aren't actually true crabs as we know them -- as the name implies, they only have eight limbs, rather than ten, and only four are used for locomotion (making them quadrupeds), with the other four used as arms. I don't think the narration goes into whether they have a set of claws, but it's reasonable to assume that they have more sophisticated contact surfaces on their "arms" than Earth crabs -- bony finger analogues would be my first guess, although muscular pads or even hair-like tentacles/fronds would be plausible.

Limiting our scope to land-dwelling vertebrates, the optimal number of limbs becomes a lot more apparent -- every land-dwelling vertebrate on Earth is a tetrapod (four limbs) although some species have subsequently lost limbs. While you could make an argument for there being an element of evolutionary inertia involved, there's a better reason for this.

It all comes down to gait.

Hexapods walk by moving legs three at a time, effectively alternating tripods. The major advantage of this system is that it is statically stable -- at any given time point in the movement cycle, the hexapod can freeze and remain standing, as its centre of gravity will remain inside its base of support. This means that the hexapod doesn't need a sense of balance, and all the cognition involved can be handled by a few neurons. In short, hexapods don't need a brain to stand or walk.

Quadrupeds can walk in a statically stable fashion (and many do, especially those with a sprawling posture) but they have a lot more room for improvement -- with the development of a sense of balance, a quadruped can use trots and gallops, which are usually faster and more energy efficient. And for vertebrates, the spine can be used as a spring, to significantly increase speed and agility. Unlike a hexapod, a quadrupedal gait does need a foot analogue, which not necessarily present in invertebrates.

Bipedal movement has even more prerequisites -- in addition to a sense of balance, it requires extensive stabilising musculature, extra cognitive capacity, and can never be statically stable -- a full-time (or 'obligate') biped has to use energy just to stand still. Despite this, bipedalism has a lot of advantages -- it raises the head (see above about the importance of an upright posture). It frees up the forelimbs for other purposes (such as becoming the kind of highly dexterous manipulators that a tool-using species can put to very good use). It allows more efficient cooling in hot environments (and exposes a much smaller cross-section to the sun). And it allows for considerable agility -- while the maximum speed of quadrupeds tends to be higher than bipeds, bipeds can generally change direction faster, and reach maximum speed from standing much faster.

We don't really have much to go on for working out how a tripedal creature would move, as there are no known species on Earth where tripedalism is normal. Our best reference point for how Chelgarians move is probably how three-legged cats and dogs move, with a kind of loping movement, but slightly smoother because the midlimb is central rather than off to one side. Quite why the midlimbs fused, I can't even imagine. It's hard to see what advantage it could possibly bring. Iridians probably move similarly -- as I understand it, their unpaired limb is functionally their rear leg, rather than the front, but that doesn't make a huge amount of difference. The Homomdans are probably more lumbering, with feet more like an elephant or rhino, but with much less restriction in which direction they move.

As to specifics, the homeworlds of the Gzilt, Iridans, and Chelgarians are all described to us, and they sound reasonably Earth-like. Better still, we see Chelgarians, Iridians, Gzilt, Homomdans and Culturnik panhumans all sharing the same atmosphere without technological assistance, which makes it a fairly safe bet they're all oxygen-breathers (I'd expect the Culture and others to include alterations for handling different atmospheres, not just 3:1 Nitrogen-Oxygen, but most of the other gases that are as volatile as oxygen will need decidedly non-trivial adaptations to be able to survive in). We also see Geseptian-Fardesile, Sichultians, Pavuleans, Xolpe and the Sarl share atmospheres with at least one of the aforementioned, so they probably breathe similar mixes.

Being oxygen-breathers implies rather a lot about the kinds of planets they evolved on -- significant oxygen in the air usually means photosynthesis (and therefore probably chlorophyll, which means green plant life -- the light put out by a main sequence star will be at the right wavelengths for chlorophyll). It also means a broadly similar biochemistry.

That fits with what we see in Look to Windward -- Ziller and Kabe (carnivorous Chelgarian and mostly-herbivorous Homomdan, respectively) share meals with the panhuman Culturniks without any worry about contamination -- Ziller will probably avoid the salad, and Kabe won't get too close to the steaks, but that's normal enough.

Having established that these species share similar atmospheres and biochemistries, we can make a reasonable guess about quite a bit more about them. To get oxygen into the atmosphere, you need an oxide for photosynthesis to work on (carbon dioxide for chlorophyll, which is probably the same for most carbon-based ecosystems). That in turn means that the planet probably has volcanic activity.

You need a planet of a decent size to support volcanism -- to maintain significant geological activity, a planet needs to be similar in size to Earth or Venus. Mars-sized planets may well be too small -- Mars' surface volcanoes are long dead. Although saying that, it's worth noting Io also has some volcanic activity, thanks to the tidal forces generated by Jupiter's gravity. Nevertheless, it's probably safe to assume that most of the planets we're interested in are of comparable mass to Earth.

That in turn means comparable gravity. This goes a long way to explaining why most of our sentient species are in a similar height range. In humans, even otherwise very healthy ones, being more than two metres tall significantly increases the risk of blood pressure problems. Not to mentioned the severity of injuries suffered from trips and falls. There are species that are taller, giraffes being the obvious example, but all of those species have had to evolve adaptations to support that, including seriously heavy duty cardiovascular systems. Adaptations like that have a knock-on effect what else you can develop -- in the case of giraffes, their throat muscles have to be extremely strong, which would seriously restrict their ability to develop the precise breath control you need for vocal speech.

We can speculate what environmental conditions might lead to Idirans and Homomdans topping out our height range. We know a little bit about Idir, specifically that pre-industrialisation, it was a death world that would make Catachan Jungle Fighters whimper. It was so lethal that Idirans evolving biological immortality didn't cause massive overpopulation. In that context the Idiran life cycle makes a good bit of sense -- the reproductive age Idirans are smaller and more agile. But once their usefulness as breeders passes, they turn into the hulking guardians of the younger generations. In that way a troop/tribe/cadre/whatever of prehistoric Idirans would have a much better chance of ensuring their young survived to adulthood.

I don't think we ever find out anything about the pre-industrial environment on Homomda. My guess would be that it has (or had) pretty extreme winds and rains -- Homomdans always seemed oddly armoured, but they're not structured for speed or agility (unlike the rhinoceros, which is pretty fast and has horns, and is the closest terrestrial analogue I could think of) which makes me think the armour is not primarily adapted to repel predators (although it probably did that as well). Also, the pyramidal shape is pretty poor for repelling ground-level attack -- if I'm wrong and it is primarily a defence against predators, my best guess would be a tree-dwelling ambush predator.

One of the comments in the original thread that prompted this post was about the lower size bound for our sentients. The big limiting factor is the need for brainpower -- sophisticated brains require disproportionate amounts of infrastructure -- the human brain averages 2 percent of a persons mass, but requires 20 percent of their oxygen supply and blood flow. In terrestrial species, absolute brain size does play a role, but it's not a straightforward case of larger is better. Larger bodies require more brainpower to operate, so brain size relative to body size is clearly important. But there are also structural aspects -- sophisticated brains need billions of neurons with a high degree of interconnectivity. For our purposes we can think of this as "density" although it's not exactly.

As we haven't really got a good standard for consciousness, judging the minimum requirement for it is obviously impossible, but as a general benchmarks, animals we think of as generally intelligent, like dogs and cats, have 160 and 300 million neurons in their cerebral cortex -- the cerebral cortex does stuff like memory, perception/awareness, and generally most of what we consider thinking. Only mammals have them, but reptiles and birds do similar stuff with their pallium. Animals we think of as having near-human intelligence, like other great apes, whales, and elephants have billions of neurons in their cerebral cortex [(gorillas 4.3B, chimpanzees 6.2B, false killer whales 10.5B, elephants 11B, fin whales 15B, and interestingly/alarmingly, long-finned pilot whales, 37.5B)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_animals_by_number_of_neurons#Cerebral_cortex). Humans have between 19 and 23 billion neurons in our cerebral cortex. This supports the idea that larger bodies require more neurons for operation.

Neurons are tiny, between 1 and 100 micrometres in diameter, but that adds up fairly rapidly, especially when you include the necessary supporting tissues, suggesting that, with terrestrial biochemistry, you can't increase the density of neurons much more than it is without compromising functionality or efficiency (which matters a lot when you're talking about the blood and oxygen requirements of a brain).

In the Culture-verse, of course, we have examples of near- and above- human intelligence being concentrated in much smaller volumes -- Player of Games includes a drone that can be held in a cupped palm that has both impressive performance and considerable intellect, while Surface Detail has a masterpiece of distributed processing in the form of a shape-changing tattoo with enough intelligence to be considered a person. While these could be taken as evidence that sentience can be achieved with much smaller body plans, I'd be inclined not to treat them as such. Primarily because they're not organic, but also because they're designed and manufactured, rather than being self-reproducing, and there's a distinct possibility that they use a limited form of the hyperspace computing used by Minds, which is frankly cheating.

For the non-surface dwelling species, I've got a lot less to go on, just a set of vague guesses. I'd bet that the Oct and Jhulpe probably developed their intelligence below the water -- in their prehistory they probably built some pretty impressive underwater structures, but they probably built most of their early infrastructure on land -- water is too good at conducting heat for developing things like metallurgy.

Similarly, I have to assume that the Morthanveld's technology developed along a very different path to humanity's. Pretty much all of humanity's major early innovations: throwing weapons, friction fires and flint-knapping, none work underwater. It's possible that the "water" that the Morthanveld evolved in isn't water as we know it, but if so I can't begin to speculate what it is. I can't remember if Djan wears a gelsuit when she's on the nestworld or just a breather. If the latter, the "water" can't be anything too exotic, but if the former, it could be pretty much anything.

The Affront are introduced with a good example of their technology developing very differently -- canonically they developed genetic modification a lot earlier in their development than most civilisations do. Humanity had achieved major domestication of several species by about 25,000 BC, and the earliest dogs date to around 40,000 BC, significantly before we invented agriculture, the wheel, or writing. Presumably at that point in time, the Affront had already started making sex miserable, and breeding their screaming tennis balls. The Affront are arseholes. I can't express this enough.

Anyway, I'm drifting from my point, so in summary, the sentient species that made it to space tend to be similar because they evolved on similar worlds and had to adapt to similar conditions and physical norms. The upper and lower bounds of physical size are dictated by the local gravity and the blood and oxygen requirements of sophisticated brain, respectively. The general body plan is a function of the advantages it offers at each stage of development. The species that deviate from the normal body plan usually evolved in very different environments, but we don't really know that much about what they were, can't ask the author, and I am not a biologist, chemist, geologist, astronomer or physicist.

## How influential is the Galactic Council? 

> Do you get the impression that it is about as defanged as the UN, or does it hold more sway?
>
> On the one hand, we never see them actually intervene. On the other hand, civs do seem to take certain rules seriously (like not excessively boosting up lesser civs technologically), and the Pavulean government seems genuinely worried about Prin testifying before them.

My impression is that, much like the UN, the importance of the Galactic Council isn't its ability to project power, it's in the provision of a framework to resolve disputes between nations without resorting to warfare. And much like the UN, its tools for enforcing resolutions it reaches are mostly indirect: firstly the reputation of each member state as a galactic good citizen, which will have knock-on consequences for their relationships with their neighbours, secondly economic sanctions, and ultimately, military force, using the militaries of the more powerful member nations.

How much influence that has in practical terms depends very much on the state involved. For the high-level involved civilisations like the Culture, only a threat to their reputation carries any weight at all, as their economies have long since moved past the point where they can meaningfully be sanctioned, and the only powers that can muster a military force capable of threatening them are other high-level involved (And nobody wants a war on the scale of the Culture-Idiran War, so the casus belli would have to be something well above the Galactic Council's paygrade). The upside is that the high-level involved civilisations tend to care a great deal about their reputations, and recognise the value in being seen to play by the same rules as everybody else, so they'll generally follow the council's lead on things like over-runging technology.

For the lower-and-mid-level involved, the economic and military sanctions have more bite to them. While most space-faring powers are going to be more or less self-sufficient as far as their conventional economies are concerned, there is unlikely to be much 'low hanging fruit' when it comes to new technological breakthroughs, so technology transfers from more advanced civilisations are much more important -- see the attitudes of the Liseiden and the Ronte and how far they're willing to go to secure the Gzilt's leftover tech. The threat of military sanctions is far more real as well -- the military assets of the high-level involved out-match even the high mid-level by an degree far greater than first and third world nations on Earth, making a military intervention far less risky for the GC than it is for the UN.

I don't recall whether we're explicitly told where the Pavuleans fall as far as technology levels go, but I've had them pegged as very low-level involved, based mostly off their cultural trappings: a government poorly adapted to multi-planet civilisation, conventional commerce, some cultural-but-not-legal sexism, dream-communication technology bulky enough that it needs to be hidden, but small enough it can be hidden inside a headboard, etc.

Assuming that's the case, it makes sense that risk of censure by the Galactic Council carries a meaningful amount of weight with the Pavuleans just on general principles. Additionally, we know the Pavuleans are a herd species, so it's reasonable to assume that the disapproval of one's peers is a significant sanction in its own right. Finally, in the specific matter of the War on Hell, it's possible that the Pavuleans have a mentor species or powerful neighbours who are on the anti-Hell side, in which case there would likely be serious consequences if Prin testifies that the Pavulean Hells aren't just a myth, regardless of whether the Council takes any action.

