---
layout: post
title:  "Scope and Scale"
date:   2024-08-17 20:00:00 +0100
categories: nonfiction space
---

In today's Total Perspective Vortex:

Everything you feel and think is contained entirely within one brain. You exist on a planet containing 8.3 billion similar brains.

Our planet exists in a solar system of eight major planets, of which ours is one of the smaller half. You will never leave here.

Our sun is 99.86% of the mass of our solar system, and is considered small and unremarkable by the standards of its kind. It exists in a galaxy with between 100 and 400 billion other stars. The impreciseness of that estimate reflects the fact that smaller, less bright stars are quite hard to see at great distance, and the galactic core blocks our view of a good chunk of the galaxy.

Our solar system is in the less dense region between spiral arms, and our most accurate techniques are too short-ranged to reach into the denser areas of the nearest spiral arm, but so far, a given star is more likely to have planets than not.

Our galaxy is part of the Local Group, which consist of at least 134 other galaxies; part of our view is blocked by the body of the Milky Way. Andromeda is the biggest in the group. The Local Group is one of several small clusters near the Virgo Cluster, a much bigger group of 1,500 galaxies. Collectively, we're part of the Virgo Supercluster, which we sometimes call the Local Supercluster.

Our supercluster consists of about 47,000 galaxies. It and its neighbouring supercluster, the Hydra-Centaurus Supercluster, are both gravitationally centred on the Great Attractor. They contain about 150,000 galaxies collectively.

We can't see what the Great Attractor is, because the core of the Milky Way is in the way, but it's probably another, even bigger supercluster. We call the everything in the gravitational basin of the Great Attractor the Laniakea Supercluster.

The Laniakea Supercluster is heading towards a larger supercluster called the Shapely Supercluster. These are just two of 61 such superclusters inside the Pisces-Cetus Supercluster Complex. Laniakea has about a third of one percent of the mass of the complex.

The Pisces-Cetus Supercluster Complex is a galaxy filament - at this scale, the superclusters form sheets and filaments in a cosmic web. The current cosmological model says there probably aren't any large scale structures beyond this, but the last decade has had a few claims of larger structures existing. The problem at this point is we're describing structures billions of light years across, the observable universe is 46.5 billion light-years in each direction, and 13.8 billion years old (because the universe is expanding, the observable universe isn't just a light year per year of the universe existing). The distances are so great that the only points of information we have are absurdly energetic events like gamma ray bursts, and we've only been looking for a couple of decades.

About the only way to make this sense of vastness more alien is to add a stranger possibility -- the actual size of the universe could be smaller than the observable universe, and that galaxies we see past a certain distance are actually the light of nearer ones that has traversed the entire surface of the universe and come back round, and we're seeing the same galaxies at an earlier stage of their life cycle. I don't have the background knowledge to judge how likely that is, but the concept alone is unsettling, in the same way that a pair of mirrors reflecting back at themselves is.