---
layout: post
title:  "Fudge v1.0"
date:   2021-02-07 13:04:17 +0100
categories: recipes fudge
---


* 400g dark or milk chocolate (I use Galaxy usually, but Bournville has worked well before)
* 397g can condensed milk (this is a standard size, for some reason)
* 25g butter
* 175g icing sugar (plus approx. 25g for dusting)
* A splash of vanilla (optional)


# Implements


* Baking tray/tin (the one I have is about A4-sized, and about a centimetre deep)
* Baking/greaseproof paper
* A sieve (technically optional, and slightly less messy if you don't use it, but the consistency of the fudge suffers without it)
* A mixing implement (a wooden spoon does the job nicely, an electric whisk would be less effort)
* A saucepan
* A sharp knife or a pizza cutter
* A set of scales

# Instructions

* Break or chop the chocolate into small chunks. If the chocolate has been frozen beforehand (which I advocate) this can easily be achieved by dropping it on a tiled surface, then whacking it against the worktop to break up any larger pieces that survived the initial impact intact.

* Place the chocolate in a non-stick saucepan with the condensed milk and butter.

* Melt the ingredients together, stirring frequently until smooth and silky. Note that you should begin stirring very quickly after placing the ingredients in the pan. If this is left too long, the bottom layer of the ingredients will overcook. This can happen faster than you expect, and will leave gritty bits of caramelised chocolate.

* Sieve in the icing sugar and mix thoroughly (you can use an electric whisk if you like, although I use a wooden spoon).

* Pour fudge into a tin that has been lined with baking paper and dusted with icing sugar.

* Chill in the fridge for until set, then cut into squares. You can do this using a sharp knife, although you'll find it much easier using a pizza cutter. As a bonus, this will produce crisper edges.

* Store in an airtight container in the fridge for up to 2 weeks.


 